# qbic-pipelines/vcftomat: Output

## Introduction

This document describes the output produced by the pipeline. Most of the plots are taken from the MultiQC report, which summarises results at the end of the pipeline.

The directories listed below will be created in the results directory after the pipeline has finished. All paths are relative to the top-level results directory.

## Pipeline overview

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) and processes data using the following steps:

- [Tabix](#tabix) - Indexes (g.)vcf files
- [GenotypeGVCFs](#genotypegvcfs) - Converts g.vcf files to vcf with GATK
- [Concatenate VCFs](#concatenate-vcfs) - Concatenates all vcfs that have the same id and the same label with bcftools/concat
- [Rename Samples](#rename-samples) - Changes the sample name in the vcf file to the label with bcftools/reheader
- [Merge VCFs](#merge-vcfs) - Merges all vcfs from the same sample with bcftools/merge
- [Convert to matrix](#convert-to-matrix) - Converts the (merged) vcfs to a matrix using a custom R script written by @ellisdoro
- [MultiQC](#multiqc) - Aggregate report describing results and QC from the whole pipeline
- [Pipeline information](#pipeline-information) - Report metrics generated during the workflow execution

### Tabix

Tabix generated index files with `.tbi` extension for all `(g).vcf` files that are given to the pipeline without index.

### GenotypeGVCFs

The GATK GenotypeGVCFs module translates genotype (g) vcf files into classic vcf files. The key difference between a regular VCF and a GVCF is that the GVCF has records for all sites, whether there is a variant call there or not.

### Concatenate VCFs

Some variant calling pipelines will return multiple (g)VCF files for one patient. The `concatenate` function of `bcftools` is used to add these VCFs to one VCF.

### Rename Samples

To make enable the comparison of the finalized CSV files, `bcftools reheader` can be enabled to rename the variant sample name from the generic name given by the variant caller to a custom label given with the samplesheet.

### Merge VCFs

To enable comparison of different variant callers or variant calling pipelines, all VCFs that come from the same sample are merged based on the sample ID submitted by the user.

### Convert to matrix

A custom R script is used to convert the finalized VCF to a CSV which can be used for further downstream analysis. Script was written by [Dorothy Ellis](https://github.com/ellisdoro).

### MultiQC

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `multiqc/`
  - `multiqc_report.html`: a standalone HTML file that can be viewed in your web browser.
  - `multiqc_data/`: directory containing parsed statistics from the different tools used in the pipeline.
  - `multiqc_plots/`: directory containing static images from the report in various formats.

</details>

[MultiQC](http://multiqc.info) is a visualization tool that generates a single HTML report summarising all samples in your project. Most of the pipeline QC results are visualised in the report and further statistics are available in the report data directory.

Results generated by MultiQC collate pipeline QC from supported tools e.g. FastQC. The pipeline has special steps which also allow the software versions to be reported in the MultiQC output for future traceability. For more information about how to use MultiQC reports, see <http://multiqc.info>.

### Pipeline information

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `pipeline_info/`
  - Reports generated by Nextflow: `execution_report.html`, `execution_timeline.html`, `execution_trace.txt` and `pipeline_dag.dot`/`pipeline_dag.svg`.
  - Reports generated by the pipeline: `pipeline_report.html`, `pipeline_report.txt` and `software_versions.yml`. The `pipeline_report*` files will only be present if the `--email` / `--email_on_fail` parameter's are used when running the pipeline.
  - Reformatted samplesheet files used as input to the pipeline: `samplesheet.valid.csv`.
  - Parameters used by the pipeline run: `params.json`.

</details>

[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html) provides excellent functionality for generating various reports relevant to the running and execution of the pipeline. This will allow you to troubleshoot errors with the running of the pipeline, and also provide you with other information such as launch commands, run times and resource usage.